INTRODUCTION
Previous published selections from the two manuscripts.—The Venice and
Arsenal versions of the Roman d'Alexandre have never till now been published
in their entirety, but Paul Meyer, in the first volume of his Alexandre le Grand
dans la littérature française du moyen âge, printed extensive extracts from both  .
manuscripts, including, in each instance, the complete text of the decasyliabic
section (B 1-76, À 1-77). His extracts from the Arsenal version were prépatéd
with‘ the manuscript at hand and thus his readings of this difficult text measure
up to what we should expect from the hand of so eminent a paleographer. Pre-
vious to the time of his publication of the Venice extracts he had not had access
to the manusceript but only to a ‘calque au crayon”? so that the misreadings
which occur from time to time are not to be laid to his charge.
Description of Venice manuscript#—Manuscript B of the Roman d’Alex-
andre (Venice, Museo Civico, VI, 665) consists of 108 parchment folios, 29 by
20 centimeters, bound in parchment. The text is written in single columns of
fifty lines per page. An examination of the manusceript fully confirms the state-
ment of Paul Meyer that it was executed by an Italian scribe in the first half
of the fourteenth century.
It is alone B and À which have preserved the decasyllabic version of the
opening section of the RAlix. As late as the early seventeenth century there was
in existence an additional manuscript, from which Claude Fauchet in his ::,
Recueil de l’origine de la langue et poésie françaisef cites nine lines corresponding i .
to B 1-2, 7805, 7807-08, 7819, 7823-25. The readings in these lines show that À
the Fauchet manuscript was closely related to B. :
In addition to red and blue stanza initials with very simple line extensions
appended, the illumination of B consists of numerous miniatures. Italian traits
of this illumination are: 1) the arrangement of the miniatures in small rectangu-
lar panels, individually located in the margins of the pages; 2) the occasional
representation (e.g., 104vo), in the backgrounds, of v-shaped or so-called
Ghibelline battlements; 3) the architectural character of the tower on fo.70vo,
with its double-arched opening supported by a square colonnette in the middle.
Byzantine traits which are characteristic of medieval Italian art in general and
1 Figures in black-faced type refer to stanza numbers. The term stanza re-
quires a slight extension of meaning in order to render the rare medieval term
laisse or tirade, but it is the nearest English approximation.
2 See AlGr I; p. 342.
8 The corresponding items for the Arsenal manuscript, which demand much
more detailed treatment, will be dealt with in the Commentary to the Arsenal
manusceript. Hereafter the two manuscripts will usually be referred to by their
sigla, B for the Venice manuscript and À for the Arsenal manuscript.
4 Hereafter referred to as RAlix.
5 Rom. 11 (1882), pp. 249-560; also AlGr IT, p. 103.
6 Les Oeuvres de Claude Fauchet, Paris, 1610, Vol. II, fo.541vo and 552ro.
Regarding this manuscript, cf. Meyer, AIGR II, pp. 105-06; also R. $. Willis,
EM 33, p. 2, n. 2.
xi

