 INTRODUCTION XV
of the Alexandre de Paris!° version. When a reference to AdeP contains a deci-
mal (such as AdeP 1v, 66.2), the stanza is absent from the critical edition of
AdeP but is to be found in one or more of the manuseripts stemming from the
AdeP version, Where no stanza correspondence is entered, the stanza is lacking
in the respective version. Thus the absence of any parenthetical entry signifies
that the stanza is present in one version only.
In the text of À certain stanza numbers (298, 299, 346, 347, 352, 357, palimp-
sest 433) are supplied in square brackets. These correspond to erasures or la-
cunæ; the assignment of stanza numbers is made from the combined testimony
of the other versions and of the vestiges of writing present in À. For details in
regard to the individual stanzas, see below, Commentary and footnotes to the
text.
Continuous line numbering is given for each text. In the text of À, numbering
with a decimal (4558.1, 4716.1, ete.) is used to designate lines which arenotby
the regular scribe of the respective section of the manuscript. For detailed
treatment of such lines, see Commentary. A set of asterisks is employed where
there is a shift from one to another of the three principal À scribes (between
folios 19 and 20, 89 and 90, 109 and 110), and in addition where a shift from the
Italian scribe to one of the principal scribes coincides with an important break
in the narrative (between folios 16 and 17). Italics are employed for material
which is clearly not by the scribe of the section in question; for details see Com-
mentary.
It should be noted that facsimiles of folios 2vo-8ro and 88vo-89ro of À were
reproduced by Paul Meyer in his AlGr, and that these serve to supplement the
facsimiles available in the plates of the present volume.
Establishment of the texts.—The à and j and the w and v have been distin-
guished; capitalization has been introduced for proper names and for the initial
letters of the lines; the standard diacritical marks have been supplied; words
have been written separately, the practices which are followed in the critical
edition of the AdeP version being as a rule observed; from time to time an ob-
vious error has been corrected by the use of square or round bracketst! or by the
relegation of the faulty reading to a footnote; in the case of doubtful readings,
details are supplied in the footnotes. Apart from these minor deviations, the
texts are presented as they stand in the Venice and Arsenal manuscripts, photo-
stats of which have been supplemented by examination of the manuseripts
themselves, and by an examination of À under the ultra-violet lamp.!? A certain
number of emendations are suggested in the footnotes, especially in cases where
a comparison with the readings in the companion text or in the AdeP version
gives ground for faith in the emendation.
A cedilla with ce is sometimes present in both B and À, frequently in conflict
with present use of ç. This cedilla is in all cases retained and in addition the ç
is employed wherever indicated by standard practice in text editing. In B the
ç appears from time to time throughout the manuscript; in the Commentary,
all occurrences of ç in À will be found listed.
19 Hereaîfter referred to as AdeP.
1 In the terminations of verb forms in À missing final letters are supplied in
square brackets in some cases where they are an aid to interpretation, but es
for est is always left unaltered, as it is almost a standard writing for À.
1 Readings disclosed or confirmed by the use of the u.-v. are called attention
to in the footnotes to À.

