xii LE ROMAN D'ÂLEXANDRE: ARSENAL AND VENICE VERSIONS
which suggest the possibility that the illumination may have been executed at
x Venice are: 1) the manner of depicting the cave on fo.56vo; 2) the frequent use
“of both pointed and bulbous domes, as well as those of complex and multiple :
curvature often used to surmount towers (fo.32ro, 81vo, 83vo, etc.); 3) the at
presence on fo.8ro, 24ro, ete., of what appear to be marble medallion-like
plaques applied to the fronts of houses, such as were often used for decorative
purposes in the facades of Venetian palaces.
That the manuscript can not be later than the early fourteenth century is
attested by the scarcity of Gothic elements in the illumination, and by the ab-
sence of plate armor, which came rapidly into vogue in the fourteenth century.
On the basis of both the handwriting and the illumination, it is clear that the
manuscript was executed in Italy in the first half of the fourteenth century, and
the illumination indicates that it belongs early ‘in the century. ‘
The handwriting in B is normally quite legible’ and indicates that the scribe
had been trained in a good scriptorium; the text further shows that he made a
real effort to follow copy, but it also shows that his command of the French
language was anything but perfect. Whether the numerous errors in syllable
count are to be attributed to him or to his source we can not definitely decide.
Captions of miniatures in Venice manuscript.—As the captions of the mini-
atures parallel closely the content of the text and so may aid in the interpreta-
tion of the text,8 a list of the captions follows.
1ro: Li jor qu’Al’x. nasqui furent li signes en ciel.—1ro: De .xxx. fil de contor
que nasquirent en icel jor que nasqui Alx.—1vo: De li .vii. maistre que apren-
doit Al’x.—2ro: D’Alx. que vint a Bucifalc en la cartre.—3ro: D’Alx. con ses
compaignons que s’ala baigner en la mer por estre chivalier.—4ro: Del rei
Felip que fist Alx. son fil chivalier.—4vo: D’Alx. que aloit au torniement.—
5ro: Dou message Nicholas que vint devant Felipon au disner.—5vo: De l’ost
Al’>x. que s’atenda soz Mont Taurin.—6r0: D’Alxx. que encontra Sanson en la
voie.—6vo: De Sanson e de Festion que vindrent por messager à Nicholas.—
7ro: De li dui messaje que dist sa raison au rei Nicholas de Cesaire.—8ro:
D’Alx. e de Nicholas que vint ajoster sor le pont de Cesaire.—8vo: De la
bataille que fist Alx. a Nicholas de Cesaire.—8vo: D’Alx. que trença la teste
a Nicholas et Aristé e Festion l’en prent.—9ro: D’Alx. que fist li doçe per.—
10ro: De li messaje Dayre que vint au rei Felip. por demander lo treu.—11ro:
D'’Aristote que amaistroit Alx.—11vo: D’Alx. que prist a chevauchier encon-
tre Cesaire.—13ro: De la gent de Gadres que vint por secorre li dus Balez de
Tyr.—17ro: De Sanson que josta au dux Betis de Gadres.—17ro: De Eum’.
que ocist Salachan un vesque de Gadres.—17vo: De la gent d’Al’x. que se com-
batoit con li ture que portoit les arc.—18vo: De Eum’. que trença un duc per
? B offers frequent cases in which, at first sight, a distinction between ir and
rr is difficult. However, in general, ris written in B with a stem which terminates
at the bottom in a blunt end, often slightly larger than the stem. The letter 2
generally has the lower part of the vertical stroke ending in a tapering curve to
the right. In nearly all cases where the normal spelling of a word demands rr,
the double r is plainly written (error 7986, terror 8001, Sarracin 8017, etc.). The
forms peire, freire rather than perre, frerre are supported not alone by the above
distinction in the forming of the letters, but also, in some instances, by the
presence of a stroke over the 1 in freire 7997, 10095; also poiront 10543. Accord-
ingly, the reading Lamberz li Toiz (with the : unstroked), instead of Torz, is
indicated for B 885.
8 Cf., e.g., footnote to B 663.

